Adding text to section on "Unexplored Therapeutics" (#196)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/20.treatments.md

There is thus value in investigating two lines of inquiry for treatment of COVID-19: 1) new therapeutics specific for treatment of COVID-19 or its symptoms, and 2) repurposing of existing therapeutics for treatment of COVID-19 or its symptoms.
Here we consider further avenues that scientific investigators may explore in the development of therapies for COVID-19.

Given the great focus in investigating hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) as a potential antiviral treatment for SARS-CoV-2, it may be of interest to researchers to explore related alternatives.
For example, hydroxyferroquine derivatives of HCQ have been described as a class of bioorganometallic compounds that exert antiviral effects with some selectivity for SARS-CoV [@doi:10.1021/jm0601856].
Future work could explore whether these compounds exert antiviral effects against SARS-CoV-2 and if they are safe for use in animals and humans.

The tocilizumab trial described in an above section [@doi:10/ggnxb3] studies the possibility of using an anti-inflammatory drug, typically used for the treatment of autoimmune disease, to counter the effects of the “cytokine storm” induced by the virus.

> Another anti-IL-6 antibody, sarilumab, is also being investigated [how to cite? http://www.news.sanofi.us/2020-03-16-Sanofi-and-Regeneron-begin-global-Kevzara-R-sarilumab-clinical-trial-program-in-patients-with-severe-COVID-19 or https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04327388].

Reviewer: This is great ! I think it would be awesome to write a couple of sentences about tocilizumab's costs at this point. Because even if tocilizumab is effective, not everyone is going to be able to afford it and production is slow. Cyclosporin is cheap and readily available and might have similar effects. This might be worth discussing

Author: I think this is a very important addition, thanks for the suggestion! I just added in a few lines about it, let me know what you think.

Typically, immunosuppressive drugs are often contraindicated in the setting of infection [@doi:10.1177/2040622313485275].
However, when the need to curtail the “cytokine storm” inflammatory response to the virus transcends the risks of immunosuppression, exploration of more anti-inflammatory agents may be warranted.
COVID-19 results in hyperinflammation that appears to contribute to mortality via lung damage, suggesting that immunosuppression may be a helpful approach to treatment [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30628-0].
While tocilizumab targets IL-6, several other inflammatory markers could be potential targets, including TNF-alpha. Inhibition of TNF-alpha by an inhibitor such as Etanercept has been previously suggested for treatment of SARS-CoV [@doi:10.1185/030079903125002757] and may be relevant for SARS-CoV-2 as well.

> Baricitinib and other small molecule inhibitors of the JAK kinase pathway also curtail the inflammatory response and have been suggested as potential options for SARS-CoV-2 infections [@doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30132-8].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Baricitinib and other small molecule inhibitors of the JAK kinase pathway also curtail the inflammatory response and have been suggested as potential options for SARS-CoV-2 infections [@doi:10/dph5].
```
DOIs with parentheses cause a bug, so I used shortdoi.org to convert this -- your formatting looks great except for this rare case!

Author: Thanks for your help!

> Baricitinib in particular may be able to reduce the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect lung cells [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30304-4].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Baricitinib in particular may be able to reduce the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect lung cells [@doi:10/ggnrsx].
```

> Clinical trials studying baricitinib in COVID-19 have already begun in the US and in Italy (how to cite? US: https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-begins-clinical-testing-therapies-covid-19, Italy: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04320277).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clinical trials studying baricitinib in COVID-19 have already begun in the US and in Italy [@url:https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-begins-clinical-testing-therapies-covid-19; @url:https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04320277).
```

Identification and targeting of further inflammatory markers that are relevant in SARS-CoV-2 infection may be of value for curtailing the inflammatory response and lung damage.

Another approach is the development of antivirals, which could be broad-spectrum, specific to coronaviruses, or targeted to SARS-CoV-2.

> The potential for remdesivir as an antiviral has already been described in an above section. Development of new antivirals is complicated by the fact that none have yet been approved for human coronaviruses. Intriguing new options are emerging, however.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The potential for remdesivir as an antiviral has already been described in an above section. 
Development of new antivirals is complicated by the fact that none have yet been approved for human coronaviruses. 
Intriguing new options are emerging, however.
```

Reviewer 3: Is it worth mentioning here that in severe cases of COVID-19 using antivirals such as remdesivir might be futile as at that points the main aim is to reduce the cytokine storm ensuing. 

just a thought.

Author: This makes sense to me as well, thanks for the suggestion. I just added a sentence at line 596, let me know what you think.

Beta-D-N4-hydroxycytidine (NHC) is an orally bioavailable ribonucleotide analog showing broad-spectrum activity against RNA viruses, which may inhibit SARS-CoV-2 replication [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.abb5883].
Various other antivirals are in development.
Development of antivirals will be further facilitated as research reveals more information about the interaction of SARS-CoV-2 with the host cell and host cell genome, mechanisms of viral replication, mechanisms of viral assembly, and mechanisms of viral release to other cells; this can allow researchers to target specific stages and structures of the viral life cycle.

Antibodies against viruses, also known as antiviral monoclonal antibodies, could be an alternative as well and are described in detail in an above section.
The goal of antiviral antibodies is to neutralize viruses through either cell-killing activity or blocking of viral replication [@doi:10.1016/j.tim.2015.07.005].
They may also engage the host immune response, encouraging the immune system to hone in on the virus.

> Given the cytokine storm that results from immune system activation in response to the virus, which has been implicated in worsening of the disease, a neutralizing antibody (nAb) may be preferable.

Author: Thanks for your comments! I think this is a great point - I brought this up in greater detail in the section discussing tocilizumab and other anti-inflammatory agents a few paragraphs above this. I just rearranged a few sentences to make the arguments for and against more clear, and to add in the citation you shared.

I didn't repeat it in the nAbs section to avoid redundancy, but let me know if you think it's worth including here too.

> Given the cytokine storm that results from immune system activation in response to the virus, which has been implicated in worsening of the disease, a neutralizing antibody (nAb) may be preferable.

Reviewer 3: its great 👍

### Underexplored Therapeutics

The majority of current clinical trials and lines of investigation have focused on repurposing existing therapies to counter SARS-CoV-2 and treat its symptoms.
This is necessary given the urgency of the situation as well as the extensive time required for developing and testing new therapies.
However, in the long-term, new drugs specific for treatment of COVID-19 may also enter development.
There is thus value in investigating two lines of inquiry for treatment of COVID-19: 1) new therapeutics specific for treatment of COVID-19 or its symptoms, and 2) repurposing of existing therapeutics for treatment of COVID-19 or its symptoms.

> Here we consider further avenues that scientific investigators may explore in the development of therapies for COVID-19.

Author: It was meant to refer to both. Let me know if you think there's a better way to say this!

The decision of whether and/or when to counter hyperinflammation with immunosuppression in the setting of COVID-19 remains in debate as the risks of inhibiting antiviral immunity continue to be weighed against the beneficial anti-inflammatory effects [@doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30691-7].
If the need to curtail the “cytokine storm” inflammatory response to the virus transcends the risks of immunosuppression, exploration of more anti-inflammatory agents may be warranted; these agents are considered here.
While tocilizumab targets IL-6, several other inflammatory markers could be potential targets, including TNF-alpha. Inhibition of TNF-alpha by an inhibitor such as Etanercept has been previously suggested for treatment of SARS-CoV [@doi:10.1185/030079903125002757] and may be relevant for SARS-CoV-2 as well.
Baricitinib and other small molecule inhibitors of the JAK kinase pathway also curtail the inflammatory response and have been suggested as potential options for SARS-CoV-2 infections [@doi:10/dph5].
Baricitinib in particular may be able to reduce the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to infect lung cells [@doi:10/ggnrsx].

> Clinical trials studying baricitinib in COVID-19 have already begun in the US and in Italy [@url:https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-begins-clinical-testing-therapies-covid-19; @url:https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04320277).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clinical trials studying baricitinib in COVID-19 have already begun in the US and in Italy [@url:https://investor.lilly.com/news-releases/news-release-details/lilly-begins-clinical-testing-therapies-covid-19; @url:https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04320277].
```

Identification and targeting of further inflammatory markers that are relevant in SARS-CoV-2 infection may be of value for curtailing the inflammatory response and lung damage.
Lastly, it is also worth noting the high costs of tocilizumab therapy and other biologics: at doses used for rheumatoid arthritis patients, the cost for tocilizumab ranges from $179.20 to $896 per dose for the IV form and $355 for the pre-filled syringe [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK349513/table/T43/].
Cyclosporine may be a more cost-effective and readily-available alternative than biologics [@url:https://escholarship.umassmed.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1677&context=meyers_pp], if it proves effective against the cytokine storm induced by SARS-CoV-2.

Another approach is the development of antivirals, which could be broad-spectrum, specific to coronaviruses, or targeted to SARS-CoV-2.

> Given the increasingly apparent role of the cytokine storm in disease pathogenesis, it is possible that antivirals could be less effective in more severe cases of COVID-19, but this is not yet known; it is regardless likely that early-stage patients may benefit from antiviral therapy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given the increasingly apparent role of the cytokine storm in disease pathogenesis, it is possible that antivirals could be less effective in more severe cases of COVID-19, but this is not yet known; regardless, it is likely that early-stage patients could benefit from antiviral therapy.
```

Upcoming work may explore the specificity of nAbs for their target, mechanisms by which the nAbs impede the virus, and improvements to antibody structure that may enhance the ability of the antibody to block viral activity.

In the longer term, as more information becomes available about the structures of SARS-CoV-2 components, small molecule inhibitors of those components may become candidates for drug discovery.
For example, crystal structures of the SARS-CoV-2 main protease have recently been resolved [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.26.964882; @url:https://www.diamond.ac.uk/covid-19/for-scientists/Main-protease-structure-and-XChem.html#].
Efforts have already been in place to perform screens for small molecule inhibitors of the main protease, yielding potential hits [@doi:10.1101/2020.02.26.964882].
Much work remains to be done to determine further crystal structures of other viral components, understand the relative utility of targeting different viral components, perform additional small molecule inhibitor screens, and determine the safety and efficacy of the potential inhibitors.

> While still nascent, work in this area promising.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While still nascent, work in this area is promising.
```
